2
At the entrance to the Artscape Chandelier Foyer Griessel stared at the giant poster. In big letters it proclaimed Anton Goosen Birthday Concert, Friday 4 March, Grand Arena, with a photo below of all the stars who would be performing there in a week’s time. Alexa Barnard was the focal point, right in the middle, just below the smaller announcement which used her stage name: Xandra Barnard is back!
And here he was with that legend on the arm of his new jacket. He swallowed hard, and held himself together.
Inside. Lots of people. He quickly surveyed the men, what they were wearing. Relief washed over him, because there were a lot of jackets. He relaxed a little, everything was going to be OK.
Heads turned towards Alexa, people called out her name, and suddenly they were surrounded. Alexa let go of his arm and began greeting people. Griessel stood back. He had suspected this would happen and was happy she was getting this reception. Last week she had been nervous and had told him: ‘I’ve been out of it for so long, Benny. And that whole thing with Adam’s death … I don’t know what to expect.’
Adam had been her husband. Benny had investigated his murder; that was how he had met her.
‘You’re Paul Eilers, the actor,’ someone said right beside him. Then he realised the pretty young woman was talking to him.
‘No,’ he said. ‘I’m Benny Griessel.’
‘I could have sworn you were Paul Eilers,’ she said, disappointed, and then she was gone.
He recognised some of the music stars. Laurika Rauch folding Alexa’s hands in hers, saying something with great tenderness. Karen Zoid and Gian Groen in conversation. Emo Adams making Sonja Herholdt laugh out loud.
Where was Lize Beekman?
A waiter pushed through the mass of bodies, came past with a tray full of champagne glasses, offered him one. He stared at the golden liquid, the bubbles lazily drifting upwards, and felt the stirring inside, the desire. He came to his senses, shook his head. No, thank you.
Two hundred and twenty-seven days without a drink.
Maybe he ought to get himself a soft drink, something to hold in his hand, rather than just standing here, a dull island in a sea of glitterati.
Look at Alexa, she was at home, in her element, she glowed.
Jissis. What was he doing here?
When he met Schalk Joubert the moment was almost too big for him.
‘Schalk, this is Benny Griessel, he also plays bass,’ Alexa introduced him, and he could feel his face turn red. With a trembling hand, ‘Pleased to meet you, it’s a helluva privilege.’ His voice was hoarse and he was startled by the swear word that slipped out.
‘Ah, a brother. Thank you very much, the privilege is all mine,’ said Schalk Joubert easily and comfortably, his tone smoothing away Griessel’s fears, making him relax. The enormous compliment of ‘a brother’ filled Griessel with gratitude, so that, in the light of Alexa’s encouraging smile, he found the courage to strike up a conversation with Theuns Jordaan and Anton L’Amour. He asked them how Kouevuur had been put together. And then, emboldened by their generosity: ‘So when are you going to record “Hexriviervallei” properly, a complete track? That song deserves it.’
He began to unwind, chatting here, laughing there, wondering what he had been so worried about. He felt almost proud of himself, and then Alexa tugged at his arm and he turned around and saw Anton Goosen and Lize Beekman, side by side, right in front of him, conspiratorial, a moment of silence that opened up in the hubbub and it was too sudden and too much and his brain shut down and his heart beat wildly and he grabbed for the tall, beautiful, blonde singer’s hand, completely star-struck, and all that came out of his mouth, the word idiotically long and drawn-out and clear in the silence, was: ‘Fok.’
And then his cellphone began to ring in his jacket pocket.
He just stood there. Frozen.
Somewhere in his head the impulse came: Do something.
He dropped Lize Beekman’s hand. Shame and humiliation burning through him, he mumbled, ‘Excuse me.’ He fumbled for his phone, turned away, pressed the instrument to his ear.
‘Hello.’ Even his own voice sounded strange to him.
‘Benny, I need you,’ said Brigadier Musad Manie, commanding officer of the Hawks. ‘Like now.’
He drove, too fast, angry with himself, angry with Alexa, how could she do that to him? Angry with the cellphone for ringing, he could definitely have recovered from his massive mistake, he could have added something, his practised sentence of ‘this is a special privilege’, it would have defused the whole mess. Angry with the brigadier making him come in on a Saturday night, his weekend off, angry because he couldn’t get the damning chorus out of his head: he had made a complete and total arse of himself. That awful moment, the word uttered, hanging like a dead, black bird between him and Lize Beekman, everything frozen except the irritating ringing of his cellphone and the knowledge that sank down in him like lead: he had made a massive unforgivable arse of himself, in spite of all his resolutions and plans and preparations.
It was really Alexa’s fault. She had wanted to know who he was keen to meet, two weeks ago already. From the beginning he had said nobody, he would just be around, available when she needed him. Because he knew he might lose it. But she had drawn the names out of him one by one, and she had said, ‘I really want to do this for you,’ and he had said, ‘No, please,’ but with ever diminishing conviction, because the prospect began to tempt him. Until he had agreed, for her sake, but the butterflies had been in his belly already, the faint terror, no, the premonition that he might not handle it well.
His fault. Just his own fucking fault.
He knew there was big trouble when he saw the three senior officers of the DPCI – the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigations – and General John Afrika, Western Cape head of Detective Services and Criminal Intelligence.
The burly Brigadier Musad Manie, commander of the Hawks, sat in the middle with a face of granite. On either side were Colonel Zola Nyathi, head of the Violent Crimes Group, and Griessel’s immediate boss, and Colonel Werner du Preez, group head of Crimes Against the State (CATS). Afrika was on the opposite side of the table.
They greeted him, Manie invited him to sit down. Griessel saw there were files and documents in front of each of the senior officers.
‘Sorry to interrupt your evening, Benny,’ said the brigadier. ‘But we’ve got a problem.’
‘A nasty problem,’ said Afrika.
Colonel Nyathi nodded.
The brigadier hesitated, holding his breath, as if there was a lot more to say. Then he reconsidered, pushed a sheet of paper across the table. ‘Let’s start with this.’
Griessel pulled the paper towards him, began to read, conscious of the four sets of eyes on him.
762a89z012@anonimail.com
Sent: Saturday 26 February. 06.51
To: j.afrika@saps.gov.za
Re: Hanneke Sloet – you were warned
Today it is precisely 40 days since Hanneke Sloet was murdered. That is
40 days of cover-up. You know why she was murdered.
This is my fifth message but you don’t listen. Now you leave me no choice. Today I will shoot a policeman. In the leg. And every day I will shoot a policeman, until you charge the murderer.
If you don’t have a report in the newspaper tomorrow that says you have reopened the Sloet case, the next bullet will not be in the leg.
No name. Griessel looked up.
‘As you can see, this was sent this morning,’ said the brigadier. ‘And tonight Constable Brandon April was shot by a sniper in the leg in the parking lot of the Claremont Station. Just before seven.’
‘Long distance shot,’ said Afrika. ‘They’re still looking for the bastard’s vantage point.’
‘The knee is bad,’ said Nyathi. ‘Shattered.’
‘A young man,’ said Afrika. ‘Won’t ever walk normally again. This crazy bastard …’ and he pointed at the email in Griessel’s hands, ‘has written to me four times. Very confused emails, they don’t make sense.’ He tapped the file in front of him. ‘You’ll see.’
The brigadier leaned forward. ‘We would like to announce that you will be leading the reopened investigation into the Sloet case, Benny.’
‘I personally asked the brigadier if we could give it to you,’ said Afrika.
‘Cloete is currently working on the Sunday papers, he says there’s a chance we can get something into the Weekend Argus and Rapport’s Cape section,’ said Manie. Cloete was the liaison officer of SAPS who handled the press.
‘We are going on radio as well, but I don’t know if that will help,’ said Afrika.
‘It’s a bit of a mess,’ said Nyathi, his frown deepening. ‘To say the least.’
‘If you’re willing, Benny. We will back you up. All of us.’
Griessel put the sheet of paper down on the table, straightened his new, fashionable black jacket and asked: ‘Hanneke Sloet … she was the lawyer?’